JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
Trump administration
outlines an aggressive plan to
crack down
on undocumented immigrants and
to strengthen
border security.
Then, betting on Trump -- our
new series kicks
off in coal country, where
families are banking
on the president's promise to
bring back jobs.
DAKOTA HALL, Coal Miner: The
only thing that
I have really given thought
about is Trump
getting in office and going back
to work.
My American dream would just be
to watch my
kids grow up happy and healthy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And taking deep
breaths to
get through the school day --
how students
in Baltimore are using
meditation to relieve
stress.
CARLILLIAN THOMPSON, Principal,
Coleman Elementary
School: The children are now
able to embrace
it and realize that: I don't
have to be angry.
I don't have to fight.
I don't have to show off.
All I need to do is breathe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
federal government has formally
begun moving
to get tougher on illegal
immigration.
The Department of Homeland
Security set that
in motion today with top-level
memos.
The new memos on immigration
were set in motion
just after President Trump's
inauguration.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I just signed two executive
orders that will
save thousands of lives,
millions of jobs,
and billions and billions of
dollars.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the secretary
of homeland
security, John Kelly, is putting
the presidential
orders into practice.
His directives greatly expand
the pool of
immigrants subject to quick
deportation.
Now anyone in the U.S. illegally
who's charged
or convicted of any crime is an
enforcement
priority.
The Obama administration focused
on immigrants
convicted of serious crimes,
threats to national
security and recent border
crossers.
White House spokesman Sean
Spicer:
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
The message from this White
House and from
the DHS is that those people who
are in this
country and pose a threat to our
public safety
or have committed a crime will
be the first
to go, and we will be
aggressively making
sure that that occurs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The new
directives do not change
the Obama program known as DACA
that protected
from deportation more than
750,000 young immigrants,
the so-called dreamers.
Mr. Trump addressed their plight
during last
week's White House news
conference.
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to
show great heart.
DACA is a very, very difficult
subject for
me, I will tell you.
To me, it's one of the most
difficult subjects
I have, because you have these
incredible
kids.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today, he told
NBC News, "We
are going to try to take care of
the dreamers
very, very much."
Authorities do plan to enforce a
longstanding
provision on people caught in
the act of illegally
crossing the Mexican border.
They will be sent back to
Mexico, even if
they're from a different
country.
On plans for a border wall, the
Kelly memos
identify locations near El Paso,
Texas; Tucson,
Arizona; and El Centro,
California, for initial
construction.
In addition, Secretary Kelly has
directed
Immigration and Customs
Enforcement to hire
10,000 additional officers and
agents.
All of this comes amid rising
fears among
immigrants and nationwide
protests.
Last week, activists staged a
day without
immigrants, shutting down
restaurants and
stores to highlight the
contributions of workers
born outside the U.S.
WOMAN: I think it's important to
show support
and to try to open their eyes
that we're not
here to be criminals.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And immigration
advocates point
to two cases, in Phoenix and
Seattle, in which
people were detained despite
apparent protection
under President Obama's
policies.
In the day's other news: The
death of a Mexican
teenager at the hands of a U.S.
Border Patrol
agent reached the U.S. Supreme
Court.
It happened in 2010, between El
Paso, Texas,
and Ciudad Juarez, Mexico.
The agent was on the American
side when he
fired at the boy on the Mexican
side.
Details of what preceded the
shooting are
in dispute.
The teen's family is seeking the
right to
sue the agent in U.S. federal
court.
In Israel, a military court
sentenced Army
Sergeant Elor Azaria to a
year-and-a-half
in prison for killing a wounded
Palestinian
attacker.
Diana Magnay of Independent
Television News
reports on the outcome in the
hotly debated
case.
DIANA MAGNAY: Grinning with
nerves perhaps
as he enters the courtroom and
still in the
comfort of his mother's arms as
he awaits
sentencing, Sergeant Elor
Azaria, 11 months
ago an unknown teenage army
medic, now a household
name and something of a hero to
many in Israel
after a military trial which has
divided the
nation.
And the national anthem from his
supporters
once the sentence is handed
down, 18 months'
jail time, one year on
probation, and a demotion
in rank, which his defense team
says they
will appeal.
Rewind to March last year in the
town of Hebron
in the occupied West Bank.
On the ground is a Palestinian
man called
Abdel Fattah al-Sharif.
Moments before, he and another
Palestinian
had stabbed and wounded an
Israeli soldier.
The other man is dead.
Al-Sharif lies wounded and
seemingly harmless.
None of the soldiers pay him
much attention,
except for one, 19-year-old Elor
Azaria.
He cocks his gun, steps forward
and fires.
In Hebron today, Al-Sharif's
family watched
as Azaria celebrated.
The prosecutor had asked for
three to five
years, but the sentence was less
than half
that, the judge citing
mitigating circumstances,
that Hebron was hostile
territory and the
suffering the Azaria family had
experienced
throughout the trial.
YOUSRI AL-SHARIF, Father of
Abdel Fattah Al-Sharif
(through translator): Getting a
year-and-a-half
is a joke.
This is not a sentenced.
If one of us killed an animal,
they would
put us in jail for God knows how
long.
They're just making fun of us.
DIANA MAGNAY: For Azaria's
supporters, he's
a victim, doing his duty by the
country in
the face of a terrorist threat,
no matter
the rules of engagement.
MAN: He's already spent a year
in jail dealing
with this.
His family has been broken.
His father had a stroke.
His mother has collapsed.
And he's got no backing from our
government.
I don't blame the army.
I blame Bibi.
DIANA MAGNAY: Bibi, Israel's
prime minister,
Benjamin Netanyahu, has gone
from backing
the military on Azaria's case
for last month
asking for him to be pardoned.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The prime
minister was out
of the country today, and had no
immediate
comment on the sentence.
There has been another migrant
tragedy in
the Mediterranean.
The Libyan Red Crescent says
that at least
74 bodies of African migrants
have washed
ashore near a city in Western
Libya.
They had been on a rubber dinghy
that was
trying to sail to Italy.
Officials say more bodies are
still floating
offshore.
Back in this country, hundreds
of people in
Northern California were forced
to evacuate
their homes after heavy storms
sent creeks
and rivers flowing over their
banks.
In San Jose, fire crews carried
out a series
of rescues as water levels
surged.
One rescue came near a homeless
encampment
amid reports that up to 40
people might be
trapped.
MITCH MATLOW, San Jose Fire
Department: Normally,
that's only three or four feet
deep out there,
but that water is not where it
normally sits.
So I can't tell you how deep it
is.
All of the water in the Coyote
Creek watershed
right now is dangerous.
It's swift moving.
It's carrying debris with it
from areas that
haven't seen water in years.
And on top of that, it may be
contaminated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Authorities say
it may take
four days or longer for the
rivers to begin
to fall.
The new head of the U.S.
Environmental Protection
Agency, Scott Pruitt, struck a
conciliatory
tone today.
As Oklahoma's attorney general,
he sued the
EPA more than a dozen times to
rein in regulations.
He also expressed doubt about
climate science.
Today, he told agency staffers
that he wants
to -- quote -- "listen, learn
and lead."
The rally resumed on Wall Street
today, after
the President's Day break.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained nearly
119 points to close at 20743.
The Nasdaq rose 27, and the S&P
500 added
14.
All three closings were new
record highs.
And the National Zoo in
Washington, D.C.,
said goodbye to Bao Bao, its
3-year-old giant
panda cub.
After a late last breakfast,
zookeepers packed
the panda up, put her in a FedEx
travel crate,
including bamboo and other
snacks, and drove
her to Washington's Dulles
Airport to catch
her flight, the panda express.
After a 16-hour flight, Bao Bao
will join
a panda breeding program in
China.
We will miss you, Bao Bao.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
more details
on the impact of the Trump
administration's
plan to deport undocumented
immigrants; fears
of a spike in anti-Semitic
violence; using
meditation to improve student
learning; and
much more.
We take a deeper look now at
today's directives
on immigration laid out by the
federal Department
of Homeland Security.
Joining us from Miami, Alan
Gomez.
He's an immigration reporter for
USA Today.
And from Tucson, Nancy Montoya,
she is senior
reporter on immigration on
border issues for
Arizona Public Media.
We welcome both of you to the
program.
Alan Gomez, to you first.
You wrote today that this is
going to mean
a significant shift in the
government's deportation
strategy.
Just how big a shift are we
talking about?
ALAN GOMEZ, USA Today: It's
really difficult
to put into context just how big
this is.
There's many components of what
President
Trump is trying to do that he's
going to need
help from Congress.
When we talk about building a
border wall,
hiring 10,000 more Immigration
and Customs
Enforcement officers and agents,
hiring more
Border Patrol, hiring more
immigration judge,
he's going to need a lot of help
from Congress
on that.
But even if you put all of that
aside, changes
that were announced today in the
Department
of Homeland Security memos
represent one of
the biggest shifts in
immigration enforcement
that we have seen in a
generation.
The pool of undocumented
immigrants that are
now available to be deported has
vastly increased.
The powers of immigration agents
have vastly
increased.
The ability of local police to
be deputized
to carry out not just ICE
functions, but Border
Patrol functions, is now a
reality and is
something that's going to
increase.
So, when you look across the
board at all
the different changes that they
make, again,
it's just really difficult to
explain just
how big of a change this is.
Basically, most undocumented
immigrants living
in the country now are at a high
risk of deportation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nancy Montoya, is
that what
you see?
You're someone who has covered
border and
immigration stories for the
last, what, several
decades.
What stands out here for you?
NANCY MONTOYA, Arizona Public
Media: Absolutely.
Well, I agree with Alan that we
are seeing
a major shift in how immigration
is functioning
in the United States.
It's not just that the president
is going
to require help from Congress in
order to
implement all these changes.
It's also the attitude of people
around the
world.
How will they view America?
I have been talking to folks
along the U.S.-Mexican
border all day long today.
And I can tell you, in my nearly
four decades
of covering the U.S.-Mexico
border, I have
never seen such energy and such
emotion coming
from the border, and it's not
positive energy
either.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Alan Gomez, there
is a bit
of a contradiction going on
here, because,
on the one hand, we hear the
secretary of
homeland security, John Kelly,
saying, no,
we're not talking about mass
deportations.
But, on the other hand, there is
an enormous
amount of fear that's being
described in the
reporting of those who have been
talking to
people who could be affected by
this.
ALAN GOMEZ: And that's because
there's a difference
between saying that you're going
to target
undocumented immigrants who have
a criminal
record and what else you're
allowed to do.
President Obama and President
Trump have said
the same thing, that their
target for their
limited deportation dollars are
undocumented
immigrants who have a criminal
conviction
on their background, who are
gang members,
who pose some sort of threat to
national security.
But what is different under
President Trump
is that now there are more
people who are
deemed enforcement priorities.
That means you don't just have
to be convicted
of a crime.
You can simply be charged with a
crime, just
be arrested and charged with
that crime.
You can commit an act that an
immigration
agent deems is a deportable
offense on his
own and initiates deportation
proceedings
against you.
And along the way, while ICE is
conducting
its operations, it is now ICE
policy for the
first time that anyone that they
pick up along
the way who just has purely
immigration violations
on their record can also be
rounded up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
ALAN GOMEZ: So that's why
everybody is scared
that it's not just going to be
criminal undocumented
immigrants; it's going to be the
whole pool.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nancy Montoya,
how clear is
all this to the people who are
affected by
it?
NANCY MONTOYA: It's not clear at
all.
In fact, I talked today with
groups from DACA
and DAPA, which are the deferred
action folks,
who are supposedly safe under
these new orders.
They don't feel safe at all.
In fact, they have told me that
the -- that
President Trump has used up all
his potential
credibility when it comes to
immigration issues.
They do not trust him.
They do not believe that they
are safe.
Many of the DACA students, who
are the dreamers,
those who were brought here as
children, told
me today that there is still
this fear.
However, going alongside of that
fear is this
renewed energy, because groups
from all over
the country, all over Arizona,
are meeting,
are working together, and so you
are going
to see a surge of protests like
never before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, meantime,
assuming they
get the funding for it, Alan
Gomez, the administration
is talking about another 10,000
ICE immigration
agents.
There are already about that
many, what, 12,000
immigration and Border Patrol
officials, if
you add it together.
So we're looking at a doubling
of the number
of people who are going to be
carrying out
enforcement.
What is that expected to mean?
ALAN GOMEZ: What that means is
that, right
now, if you're an undocumented
immigrant who
is living in the United States
under President
Obama, the odds of you running
into an immigration
officer, the odds of a raid at
your...
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean under
President Trump.
You said under President Obama.
I think you meant under
President...
(CROSSTALK)
ALAN GOMEZ: Yes, I was just...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Oh, you were
making a contrast.
(CROSSTALK)
ALAN GOMEZ: Comparison.
Yes, sorry.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead.
ALAN GOMEZ: Basically, before,
it was -- the
odds of you running into an
immigration agent
who was going to arrest you,
detain you, and
start initiation -- deportation
hearings was
very low.
What this does is ramp that up
dramatically.
And it allows -- and when you
add the numbers
-- the numbers of more ICE
agents with their
new directives, and knowing that
they can
target anybody that they
encounter on the
street, you're going to have
what we have
seen in the last couple weeks,
which is panic.
There was a school in Corpus
Christi that
almost had to close down because
there was
a fear that there was
immigration agents in
the neighborhood.
And so you are going to see more
of them.
And every time undocumented
immigrants or
those immigrant communities at
large see ICE
agents in the area, it's going
to create a
panic in that community.
And we're going to see that
repeating itself
over and over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nancy Montoya, is
that what
you think may be happening?
And if that's the case, what are
the recourses
for people who are out there who
have questions?
Do they feel they can even come
forward and
try to get those questions
answered?
NANCY MONTOYA: One of the things
that has
amazed me is how the faith
community has come
together.
Back in the 1980s, there was
something called
the sanctuary movement that
started right
here in Tucson, in fact, at
South Side Presbyterian
Church.
That's when Central American
refugees fleeing
the violence of the civil war in
Central America
wound up in the U.S.
Now, just two or three weeks
ago, South Side
Presbyterian Church again has
ignited the
sanctuary movement.
Right now, there are more than
2,000 churches,
synagogues and mosques around
the country
that are calling themselves
sanctuary sites,
where people can go in and ask
for help.
And I was asked, how do people
find this?
If you just Google sanctuary
churches, you
will be able to hook up with a
church, a mosque
in your area.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Alan Gomez,
finally, for those
who have questions about this,
where do they
turn?
Where can they go to get
answers?
ALAN GOMEZ: That's a very good
question.
It's -- right now, the best
thing you can
-- the only option you have
right now is to
look at the two memos the
Department of Homeland
Security put out there.
The White House and Homeland
Security have
tried to provide some guidance.
It took some prodding from us
today for them
to say on the record that DACA
will remain
and that those people who have
those DACA
protections, those will be
honored.
So, yes, I think, a little bit
like we saw
with the travel ban a few weeks
ago, we're
operating in a bit of a gray
space, where
we're not quite sure how exactly
all these
orders are going to be
implemented.
We have a lot of questions about
how specific
aspects that we haven't even had
time to get
into tonight are going to be
implemented.
And I think it's going to be
like we saw with
the travel ban, little by
little, as things
get tested, and as people fight
back and sue
the Department of Homeland
Security in certain
cases, that we're going to
really realize
what this all means.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, the
"NewsHour" is going
to continue to cover this very
closely.
Alan Gomez, Nancy Montoya, we
thank you.
ALAN GOMEZ: Thank you.
NANCY MONTOYA: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The past couple
of months have
seen a wave of anti-Semitic
incidents in the
United States, including a dozen
bomb threats
at Jewish community centers in
the past two
days, and the destruction of
gravestones in
a Jewish cemetery in Missouri.
The president today made a
statement of condemnation,
but it comes amid growing
concerns in this
country about anti-Semitism and
other incidents
involving hate, and some
criticism that President
Trump hasn't responded
forcefully and quickly
enough.
Our John Yang has the story.
JOHN YANG: Over the past two
days, authorities
have evacuated Jewish community
centers in
a dozen cities across the
country, the latest
this morning in La Jolla,
California.
MAN: It's just bigotry raising
its head again
in this country.
JOHN YANG: No explosive devices
were found,
but it's part of an unsettling
series of events.
On Monday, more than 200
headstones were toppled
and damaged at a Jewish cemetery
in Saint
Louis.
Since January 1, 54 Jewish
centers in 27 states
have been the target of 70
threats.
In all of 2016, there was just
one such incident.
This morning, at the National
Museum of African
American History and Culture,
President Trump
condemned the threats.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
The anti-Semitic threats
targeting our Jewish
community and community centers
are horrible
and are painful and a very sad
reminder of
the work that still must be done
to root out
hate and prejudice and evil.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump's comments
followed Monday's
tweet from his daughter Ivanka,
who converted
to Orthodox Judaism before her
2009 marriage
to Jared Kushner: "We must
protect our houses
of worship and religious
centers."
The president was far stronger
today than
he was last week, when, in two
news conferences
over two days, he was asked
about the apparent
uptick in anti-Semitic
incidents.
DONALD TRUMP: Watch how friendly
he is.
Go ahead.
JOHN YANG: On Thursday, he
dismissed a question
from a reporter for an Orthodox
Jewish weekly
as very insulting and unfair.
DONALD TRUMP: Number one, I am
the least anti-Semitic
person that you have ever seen
in your entire
life.
I hate the charge.
I find it repulsive.
JOHN YANG: Today, the
Anti-Defamation League
urged Mr. Trump to present a
plan to combat
anti-Semitism.
And we are joined by the head of
the Anti-Defamation
League, Jonathan Greenblatt, who
is in Palm
Beach, Florida.
Jonathan, thanks for joining us.
You tweeted this afternoon that
polling shows
that anti-Semitic views have
been fairly constant
for the past 20 years, despite a
little uptick,
you say, in 2013 and 2016.
JONATHAN GREENBLATT, CEO and
National Director,
Anti-Defamation League: Right.
JOHN YANG: Why, then, are we
seeing this wave
of threats against Jewish
community centers?
What's going on here, in your
view?
JONATHAN GREENBLATT: Well, look,
the ADL has
been tracking anti-Semitic
attitudes since
the 1960s.
And, as you said, our latest
poll, which looks
at anti-Semitic attitudes in
2016, turned
up about 14 percent of all
Americans harbor
these ideas.
That's more than 30 million
Americans.
So, it's not a small number.
But I think what's changed is
the fact that,
over the course of the last 12
to 18 months,
we saw -- we had a political
campaign that
saw extremism move from the
margins into the
mainstream of the political
conversation.
We saw images and ideas from
white supremacists
literally shared from political
campaigns
showing up in the Twitter feeds
of major news
organizations.
We saw it in our political
rallies as well.
And then, after the election,
there was a
surge of hate crimes.
We saw acts of vandalism,
certainly a lot
of slander on social media and,
in fact, in
the last few months, as you
mentioned, a number
of bomb threats, almost 70, to
dozens of Jewish
community centers across the
country.
So, I think what's happened is,
the extremists
feel emboldened.
The lack of comments from the
highest levels
of our political office have
created a vacuum
that they have rushed to fill,
bringing their
hateful ideas literally into the
center of
our public life.
That's got to stop.
JOHN YANG: Well, the president
did speak out
today.
What's your response to that?
What do you think of what he
said?
JONATHAN GREENBLATT: He did.
The president took an important
first step
today.
Literally, we hadn't heard him
speak in the
way that he did, talking about
that these
threats are painful and that
anti-Semitism
is horrible.
Of course we agree.
And so his statement today was
an important
first step.
But, as we have said for a long
time, now
we need the next step, which is
a plan of
action to calm these communities
where anxiety
has reached an incredibly high
level.
JOHN YANG: What do you want to
see him do?
JONATHAN GREENBLATT: Well, there
are a series
of things.
We think it's time for the
president to announce
steps for the White House to
undertake.
Number one, the FBI has been
fantastic in
responding to these threats and
these scares.
But we'd like to see a
full-fledged, comprehensive
investigation from the
Department of Justice,
using all of their energies to
launch a civil
rights investigation.
They have got the power to do
that and to
work with U.S. attorneys around
the country.
Attorney General Sessions should
get that
started immediately.
Number two, we'd like to see a
White House
task force on hate crimes.
This could be something again
convened by
the attorney general, but you
would bring
to bear DHS, the Department of
Education,
the FBI and other federal
agencies to use
all of their resources to deal
with this problem.
Number three, law enforcement
needs to be
trained on dealing with
extremism.
The ADL does this already around
the country.
And we need to make sure that
every law enforcement
agency and officer understands
how to deal
with hate.
And, number four, we think every
state should
have hate crimes laws.
It's worth sharing, John, that
five states
today don't have hate crimes
laws, including
South Carolina, where just last
week, a man
was arraigned.
He had been arrested by the FBI
for plotting
a Columbine-style attack on a
synagogue in
Myrtle Beach.
But you know what?
That man couldn't be charged
with a hate crime
in South Carolina because it
doesn't have
a law on the books.
So, the attorney general could
push and the
president could push governors
and state attorney
generals to move forward with
hate crimes
laws all over America to protect
the Jewish
community and other marginalized
groups.
JOHN YANG: We have got about a
minute left.
The president was asked about
this very topic
three times over two press
conferences last
week.
JONATHAN GREENBLATT: Yes.
JOHN YANG: What did you think of
the responses
last week, and why do you think
it took him
until today to get to where he
is today and
what he said today?
JONATHAN GREENBLATT: Well, look,
the response
last week in both press
conferences was clearly
inadequate.
But what we should focus on now
is, he's taken
the first step.
So, how do we seize this
opportunity?
How can he manifest moral
leadership and say,
I'm not only outraged, I am
energized to take
action?
And when he does that, the ADL
will be prepared
to work with him to find the
perpetrators
and to ensure that America truly
is no place
for hate.
JOHN YANG: Jonathan Greenblatt
of the Anti-Defamation
League, thanks very much for
joining us.
JONATHAN GREENBLATT: You're
welcome.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
coal miners who
have placed their bets on
President Trump's
promise to bring back jobs; and
using the
game of chess to help troubled
youth.
But first; Baltimore, Maryland,
has high unemployment
and a violent crime rate of
nearly twice the
national average.
Educators say that factors like
these add
significant stress to children
and cause emotional
and behavioral problems.
Several area public schools are
working to
reduce that stress with programs
that teach
mindfulness and meditation.
Our Hari Sreenivasan has the
story.
It for our weekly series Making
the Grade.
MAN: And exhale, pushing out all
the things
that make you stressed out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This isn't
your local yoga
studio.
It's the Mindful Moments Room at
Patterson
High School in East Baltimore.
It's a place students go when
they act up,
get stressed out, or just need a
break.
MAN: Stay in your happiness.
LATONYA LEE, Student: My day is
so stressful.
As soon as I walk in the door --
I don't even
have to do exercises.
There's just a big smile on my
face because
I'm in here.
If they didn't have mindful
moments in Patterson,
I wouldn't be here at all.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Why?
LATONYA LEE: Because it's too
stressful.
And for -- to not have a place
to relieve
stress is like putting you in a
oven.
HARI SREENIVASAN: These students
are participant
ambassadors for mindfulness
meditation programs
run by the nonprofit Holistic
Life Foundation
at Patterson High.
It's a school that has struggled
with higher
rates of dropouts, absenteeism,
and has more
students on free or reduced
lunches than the
national average.
Nineteen-year-old Chris Bowman
not only practices
mindfulness meditation at
school, but he starts
his day with it, and yoga, which
he's used
to deal with his demons.
At a previous school, he says he
used to fight
with kids who picked on him for
being black.
Then his father died when he was
13.
CHRIS BOWMAN, Student: Growing
up without
a father and stuff like that, I
struggled
with a lot of depression, a lot
of grief,
and a lot of just really bad --
really bad
zones of like suicidal thoughts.
But I had to find a way to get
out of that.
A mindful moment is when you --
you just take
a deep breath in a moment of
conflict and
just -- maybe you just look at
that and just
like, I can do this in a
different way.
I don't have to fight this
person.
I don't have to look violence as
the answer.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When you get
really angry
at somebody else, and they want
to fight you,
and you're close to losing it,
what do you
do?
TADREAL KING, Student: I just
stress rest.
And I will go to the back of the
room and
sit by myself and due stress
rest to relieve,
so I won't...
HARI SREENIVASAN: But isn't that
person going
to say, oh, well, look at that,
she lost,
she doesn't want to fight me,
she's too scared?
TADREAL KING: See, at that
point, I don't
care.
I'm just thinking of the
positives, instead
of fighting, because...
HARI SREENIVASAN: Good.
Kirk Philips manages mindful
moment programs
for the Holistic Life
Foundation.
Given all the stresses that
they're living
with, how does taking a few
breaths help?
KIRK PHILIPS, Program Manager,
Holistic Life
Foundation: There's the drama,
there's violence,
there's all kinds of issues.
And they need it more than most
kids who don't
have that sort of trauma in
their everyday
lives.
Those are the kids that really
do need to
step outside of that cycle of
violence.
Patterson principal Vance Benton
agrees.
VANCE BENTON, Principal,
Patterson High School:
When they're under situations
outside the
school building, sometimes
difficult situations,
hopefully, they will be able to
take a breath,
reconsider, and possibly walk
away from death.
And when I say walk away from
death, that
means either death themselves or
them killing
someone based on a situation
that exploded.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A survey at
Patterson High
four years ago showed most
students experienced
the death of a relative or
neighbor.
The founders of Holistic Life
approached the
principal soon thereafter with
an idea.
Principal Benton is so
convinced, he now meditates
every day.
VANCE BENTON: Lift your head up
with your
outward breath.
The feel in here since we have
had the mindful
moment is calmer.
Children are a lot calmer.
I don't believe in jinx, so I
will say this,
that although there are
altercations that
happen during the course of a
school day,
during the course of a school
year, our male
students, particularly our black
male students,
they don't fight each other in
this building.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's
research that shows
the effectiveness of mindfulness
and meditation,
but whether or not it is
effective in the
classroom will take some more
research.
Studies in peer-reviewed
journals have shown
mindfulness meditation that
focuses on breathing
has positive impacts on
important parts of
the brain.
The amygdala, stimulated from
strong emotions
such as fear, shows less
activity through
meditation.
The hippocampus, which regulates
the amygdala
and is key to learning and
memory, becomes
more active following
mindfulness.
And the prefrontal cortex,
associated with
maturity and making wise
decisions, also becomes
more active.
Erica Sibinga of Johns Hopkins
University
has published studies on
mindfulness practice
and children.
ERICA SIBINGA, Johns Hopkins
University: Our
qualitative data, our interview
data from
youth do suggest that they use
these techniques
to help them settle themselves
before they
take tests, to help them have
better sleep
patterns and sleep hygiene.
And we believe that those
outcomes will also
have downstream effects on
academic performance.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Education
administrators
often look at measurable
results, like test
scores and graduation rates.
But how can you measure the
effectiveness
of mindfulness?
MARIAH WOODS, Student: Inhale in
deep and
bring the goodness in.
And slowly get up.
I want you to lay down, close
your eyes, and
you relax and you -- that's the
time, that's
the time for you just to relax
and make sure
you think of the good things in
your mind.
When you have all the love in
your heart,
and you just want to send it to
somebody,
not even calling on the phone,
all you got
to do is inhale and send all of
it out, and
they're going to get it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Third and
fourth graders
at Coleman Elementary practice
yoga and meditation
during after-school programs
often without
anyone to lead them.
Their principal, Carlillian
Thompson, has
noticed a major change in
behavior in the
last three years.
CARLILLIAN THOMPSON, Principal,
Coleman Elementary
School: Since it's been in
effect, office
referrals, the number has gone
to almost zero.
We have zero suspensions.
The children are now able to
embrace it and
realize that: I don't have to be
angry.
I don't have to fight.
I don't have to show off.
All I need to do is breathe.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mindfulness
breathing programs
are now in more than a dozen
Baltimore schools.
Similar programs are in schools
in at least
15 states across the country.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan for the
"PBS NewsHour"
in Baltimore.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a special
series this week
on the hopes and economic
realities of many
of those Americans who voted for
President
Trump.
Three reports will take us to
Erie County,
Pennsylvania, Central Valley,
California,
and the coal towns of West
Virginia.
The president made economic
promises in each
of these places that helped him
win.
Filmmakers with PBS' "Frontline"
went to those
areas looking for personal
stories.
Our first report is set in coal
country in
West Virginia, and profiles two
miners we
spoke with after the election.
It is part of How the Deck Is
Stacked, "NewsHour"'s
collaboration with "Frontline"
and Marketplace,
in conjunction with the
Corporation for Public
Broadcasting.
DAVE BOUNDS, Retired Coal Miner:
I have been
registered Democrat all my life,
but I crossed
over this year.
I voted for Donald Trump,
because he promised
to help the coal miner.
And, for this region, we need
help.
There's good men out here just
walking the
streets.
Their families are getting
desperate.
Welfare can't keep people
forever.
These men need to go back to
work.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
So I just left parts of
Virginia, and West
Virginia.
And the coal industry is
decimated.
The miners are out of work.
They are totally out of work.
I mean, there's -- there will be
no such thing
as coal in this country pretty
soon.
What we're going to do, folks,
is going to
be so special.
We're going to bring back our
jobs.
We are going to be America
first.
We are going to make America
great again.
DAKOTA HALL, Coal Miner: I
really want to
be a coal miner, always have
been, ever since
I was in high school.
Everybody had their dreams about
being a basketball
player, football player.
I always just wanted to be a
coal miner.
The only thing that I really
have given thought
about is Trump getting in office
and going
back to work.
My American dream would just be
to watch my
kids grow up happy and healthy.
That's the only thing I could
ever ask for.
I didn't have anything very
long, you know,
not a whole lot anyway.
Didn't make enough.
Didn't work long enough.
They said that things went dry.
It made it really, really hard
to take care
of a baby and a wife.
MAN: Since the election, a lot
of lights have
came on in mining.
MAN: Since the election, a lot
of lights have
came on in mining.
Most of them have a job waiting
on them, or
they wouldn't be here to spend
that money.
Getting outside with nobody
hurt, now that's
what pays the bills, and pays it
the right
way.
We don't want no blood on that
coal.
Nobody does.
MAN: What year is this truck?
DAKOTA HALL: Fourteen.
MAN: Fourteen?
DAKOTA HALL: I just got it two
months before
I got laid off.
MAN: So, you need to hurry and
get back to
work, don't you?
DAKOTA HALL: I guess I basically
seek it because
it's hard work.
And I have always been a fan of
hard work.
It's the way I was brought up, a
family man,
I guess.
What are you doing, buddy?
Callie (ph), she's 4 days old.
She was just born on Friday.
Colton (ph), he's -- he will be
2 in February.
My father never was really there
through the
picture, you know?
I only got to meet him twice.
I never would let my kids down.
I always told myself that.
Coal mining, I don't think it's
that risky.
My family's done it for
generations.
But I think it's well worth it.
You know, there is risk in
everything you
take.
MAN: Respirable dust is on the
test.
You can't see that with your
naked eye.
The dust you see, you will cough
up.
It gets caught in your throat
and in your
nose and in your mouth.
If we will do our job, we can
eliminate black
lung.
It's something you don't want as
part of your
check.
MAN: I hate to take such big
breaths, but
I really need to sometimes.
MAN: I hate to take such big
breaths, but
I really need to sometimes.
DAVE BOUNDS: Coal mining is a
rough job.
I was very seldom off.
I worked six days a week, and
sometimes seven.
I worked 16 hours a day, instead
of eight.
When I first went in the mines
in 1969, the
risk factor of black lung
disease wasn't mentioned
a whole lot.
I was one of them young coal
miners.
I would never get it.
No, not me.
I mean, it happens to a lot of
these older
miners, but not me.
That's what I thought.
The doctor told me, he said, you
have contracted.
Now you need to do something
about it.
But buying a home, buying two
automobiles,
I had my daughter in school.
You couldn't go out and just
quit work and
go hunt a job somewhere in
another field that
you wasn't even trained for.
So, you just had to keep
working.
You had to keep going, until,
one day, you
realize, hey, I done went too
far.
You had to keep going, until,
one day, you
realize, hey, I done went too
far.
Our new administration is
talking about repealing
Obamacare and doing away with
Obamacare and
starting a new one.
And one of our greatest fears
now is, if you
take the provisions out for the
coal miners
-- I spent four-and-a-half years
in litigation
to get my black lung benefits
started.
I wouldn't want my wife to spend
four-and-a-half
years trying to get her started,
if something
were to happen to me.
I realize a lot of coal mines
have shut down.
They have filed bankruptcy.
But taking a man's benefits
shouldn't be part
of it.
And everything that was promised
unto him
to go to work should be there
waiting on him
when he gets ready to retire,
without any
controversy.
He earned that.
I thought I was 10-foot-tall and
bulletproof.
It didn't take long for me to
realize I wasn't.
Now I find myself as a
69-year-old, broken-down
coal miner.
I think it's going to be the one
to take me
out in the end.
They can say, well, this man
died of black
lung.
DAKOTA HALL: If it picks up and
it starts
booming, that's probably all I
will do for
the rest of my life, until I
retire anyway.
I would love to do that, be a
coal miner,
support my family, make good
money, you know,
have something in life.
DAVE BOUNDS: I cherish the days
I got to spend
with my dad and worked with him.
I miss him.
I really do.
Those memories, I wouldn't -- I
wouldn't want
taken away.
And if I could give any advice
to any young
miner right now, I would say
run.
Find you another occupation.
When you see a coal mine, turn
around and
go the other way.
You just got to leave.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For a look at the
full-length
film, you can go to the
"NewsHour" Web site.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
As we reported earlier,
President Trump visited
the African American Museum of
History and
Culture today, spending time
considering the
struggle to overcome racism in
the United
States.
Tonight, another installment in
our series
Race Matters, focused on finding
solutions
to racism.
Special Charlayne Hunter-Gault
reports from
Athens, Georgia, on building
bridges through
the game of chess.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: This is
one of Lemuel
LaRoche's day jobs, teaching
graduate students
in the University of Georgia's
School of Social
Work.
But LaRoche is a man of many
parts, one who
doesn't separate town from gown,
especially
the parts of town populated by
troubled youth.
LEMUEL LAROCHE, University of
Georgia School
of Social Work: These kids are
looking for
opportunities, looking for a way
out, bouncing
from foster home to foster
homes.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And, to
that end,
LaRoche puts all of his teaching
skills to
work with troubled and
not-so-troubled youth,
and others from other places,
with chess,
the game he loves and sees as
more than a
game.
LEMUEL LAROCHE: While in Israel,
I got an
opportunity to play chess with
this old Russian
man.
And although we didn't have --
we didn't speak
the same language, while we had
the chessboard,
as were playing chess, I kind of
stepped outside
of myself and realized, like,
wow, and how
I was able to connect with this
person, that
even we didn't play chess --
even though we
didn't speak the same language,
we were able
to connect through the
chessboard.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But you
learned something
from it?
LEMUEL LAROCHE: Yes.
Yes.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: What was
it that you
learned?
LEMUEL LAROCHE: What I took from
that lesson
was more of a -- this is a game
that can really
unify races.
This is a game that can really
unify people.
Chess is such a metaphor for
life.
When I teach chess, I try to
teach it from
the perspective of, how do you
take this game
and correlate it with the real
world?
And when teaching children how
to play chess,
I try to teach them how to look
at the world
different.
The same goes, when you give a
man fish, he
eats for a day.
When you teach a man how to
fish, he eats
for a lifetime.
I try to apply the same concept
with chess.
DIONNE MCALLA, Chess Player: I
think more
critically.
I have to focus more, because,
in chess, if
you mess up moves, then you can
basically
throw your whole game off.
So, you really need to think
about what you
do before you do it.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But you
also begin
to close doors -- well, close
spaces between
black children and white
children and Latin
children.
Tell me how you did that.
LEMUEL LAROCHE: Adults are
programmed in their
own viewpoints, their political
views, their
religious views.
But kids are still innocent.
So, if we can succeed at putting
children
together, getting children to
shake hands,
look into each other's eyes,
have that socialization
in where they can engage and
touch each other
in a positive way, then, when
that child becomes
a mayor or a commissioner or is
put in a position,
he or she has an experience or
have had an
experience with African-American
youth.
So, using chess as a tool to
bring kids together,
we do it through chess and
pizza, chess and
ice cream, where we bring these
kids together.
That, in essence, force the
parents to come
together, and before we know it,
we have a
community that is really
beginning to build
collectively.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And they
begin to
understand each other beyond
chess?
LEMUEL LAROCHE: Indeed, because
that's important.
And, oftentimes, chess is just
used as the
hook to bring them to the table.
But, beyond chess, now that I
have a relationship
with you -- if I have been
programmed to see
you as a criminal, as a thug, as
a racist,
chess is a way for you to have
that one-on-one
interaction, and now I realize
that man what
-- who I thought was a thug just
beat me in
chess.
MICHAEL MORRIS, Chess Player:
What this is
doing is helping me learn in
life that you
think ahead and plan ahead
before you move.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: What
happens when
the police play chess with these
kids?
LEMUEL LAROCHE: To watch the
police officers
engage with youth in a game of
chess is -- to
me, it's a brilliant thing.
One is because, a lot of times,
the way we
have been programmed and
conditioned to see
each other, kids have been
programmed to hate
the police, based on historical
mistrust,
as well as relationships that
they have had
with parents, or if they have
seen a police
officer incarcerate their
parents.
So there is a negative
stereotype about police
officers in our community.
And, oftentimes, police officers
have been
programmed to see a lot of young
African-American
youth as criminals because of
the things that
they have dealt with.
Engaging the kids with the
police officers
in a game of chess, it helps
both the youth,
as well as police officers, to
break the stereotypes
that we have developed about
each other.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And you
get reactions
from...
LEMUEL LAROCHE: Very positive
reactions, because,
one, the kid now recognizes he
has seen a
police officer smile.
There's positive socialization.
People are beginning to engage
with each other.
The police officer is telling a
kid, man,
you beat me in chess.
It develops a relationship that
you don't
see.
So, once a year, we have what's
called Justice
Served.
And this is a way for the kids
to whoop up
on the police officers through
chess, but
all in positive interaction.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, for
communities
where they don't have a chess
master, or even
a griot, are there lessons
beyond chess, do
you think?
When you they have these
divisions, how do
you bridge the gaps?
LEMUEL LAROCHE: By bringing
people together.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: How?
You can't just stand on the
street and you
say, you all come.
We're going to get together
tonight.
LEMUEL LAROCHE: By building what
we have built
locally in Athens.
It was a process.
You first have to allow those
who are in positions
of power to engage with people
who are affected
by policies that are being
joined.
So, to get both in a room, we
have helped
to strengthen that process
through our annual
chess conference.
This is a conference that brings
policy-makers
in the room with kids that are
affected by
policies.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But now
you're talking
about chess.
I want to talk about how you do
it if you
don't have chess as the
centerpiece?
LEMUEL LAROCHE: I truly believe
that it is
important to try to reach them
at the youth,
at the ground level.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Who has
to take the
lead?
What kind of people do you think
need to get
engaged in this, and how do they
go about
bringing this in?
LEMUEL LAROCHE: If we begin to
look at things
as we are all small pieces of
the big puzzle,
then that helps to make the
picture a lot
more clearer.
The great WEB Du Bois said that
the problem
with the 20th century is going
to be the problem
with the color line.
And it's sad that, in the 21st
century, we
still find ways to erase that
color line or
find a way to turn that line
into a circle,
where we can include everyone.
I'm optimistic because I see how
we engage
the youth on the ground.
I see what happens when we
engage little white
boys, little white girls, and,
you know, Asian
and Hispanic.
We bring the kids together.
I see that type of engagement
that they have.
I see the genuineness in it.
And I'm in a position that, when
I see parents,
the parents, the parroting of
the parents,
when the kids are repeating what
they hear
from the parents.
Then it's an opportunity for me
to redirect
that concept, redirect that
thought.
So, by engaging the youth on the
ground, having
them engage, talk to each other,
having them
play with each -- socialize with
each other,
I believe that that is the one
way that we
can erase it.
And it's about allowing those
who have been
programmed to see you a certain
way, or how
we have been programmed to see
other people
certain ways, that we really
begin to have
that genuine dialogue, that
genuine interaction.
And I try to do that through my
work.
But I am very optimistic that it
can happen.
It's tough, but it can happen.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Thank
you very much,
Lemuel LaRoche, for joining us.
LEMUEL LAROCHE: Thank you so
much.
It's an honor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
perspective
on America's elderly from a
once-worried daughter.
America's aging population
continues to explode
and will double, from 46 million
today to
98 million by the year 2060.
This week's IMHO, In My Humble
Opinion, features
Annabelle Gurwitch.
the author of the book "Wherever
You Go, There
They Are."
ANNABELLE GURWITCH, Author,
"Wherever You
Go, There They Are": When my
sister and I
stepped in to help our declining
parents,
there were finances and
insurances to detangle.
We wanted them to move nearer to
us, but they
needed to stay close to their
doctors.
Now, the aging-at-home option
has been touted
as a cost saver, but it doesn't
address the
isolation and loneliness that
marks life for
many seniors.
So we started looking for the
next place.
It turns out there are few
resources for the
middle class.
We found palatial residences
like the one
I think of as villa grande with
wine tastings
and white table dining, or villa
even more
grande with personal butlers and
architectural
layouts named for Picasso and
Renoir.
The Michelangelo was the size of
New Hampshire.
I started waking up in the
middle of the night
just to search the Web.
Just how much are kidneys going
for these
days?
My parents had champagne taste,
but were on
a box wine budget, and the place
that we found
was something of a letdown.
It wasn't the most up-to-date.
It was hard for them to get used
to the traffic
sounds and the bright lights
outside the facility.
My parents were Jewish, but not
observant.
And my father was caught on more
than one
occasion smuggling bacon into
the kosher cafeteria,
while my mother found it
upsetting that, at
the exercise class, which
included people
in wheelchairs, they played the
song "Don't
Get Around Much Anymore."
There were small victories.
My mother lobbied for K.C. and
the Sunshine
Band, so the still ambulatory
residents could
shake, shake, shake, shake,
shake, shake their
booty every Tuesday and Thursday
morning.
But my mother still had trouble
making friends,
because depression can keep you
trapped inside
your shell.
Now I was waking up in the
middle of the night
wondering if I should move
closer to them,
but my son was in high school,
and I'm a writer
and performer who is often on
the road.
And then something remarkable
happened.
My father's health deteriorated,
and this
community rallied around them,
visiting, helping
out, making sure that my mother
had someone
to have meals with.
One night, my mother's new BFF,
Helen, and
I went for a stroll, and she
took my arm.
And I had no idea what had
happened in Helen's
life that had brought her to the
same place
as my mother, who she loved or
who loved her,
but I took my first deep breath
in months.
Villa grande wouldn't have been
right.
My house wouldn't have been
They found a family, which was
more than what
any of us could have hoped for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: When is a laugh not a real
laugh?
Before her death, writer and
civil rights
activist Maya Angelou reflected
on the inspiration
for one of her most enduring
poems, a story
that's featured in a new PBS
"American Masters"
documentary.
We take a look at it on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tune in later tonight on
PBS.
A new "Frontline," "Out of
Gitmo," tracks
down what life is like for those
released
from America's most
controversial prison.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.